[Blog] Introducing the memory retention policy for agentic memory in OpenSearch (#4191)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2026-07-22-Automatic-memory-lifecycle-management-for-agentic-AI-in-OpenSearch.md

---
layout: post

> title: "Introducing the memory retention policy for agentic AI in OpenSearch"

Reviewer: for agentic memory

<!--more-->

## The problem: memory without a lifecycle

A memory container holds four types of memory, and each grows for a different reason:

| Memory type | What it stores | Growth driver |
|---|---|---|
| **sessions** | Conversation sessions between a user and an agent | Every new conversation |
| **long-term** | Distilled knowledge extracted from conversations | Every fact the agent learns |
| **history** | Immutable audit trail of interactions | Every operation |
| **working** | Individual messages within a session | Every message |

Left unmanaged, a busy support agent can accumulate hundreds of thousands of sessions in weeks. You end up paying to store — and search across — conversations that no longer matter. The retention policy gives you a declarative way to keep the container at a healthy size without writing any cleanup scripts.

## Opt-in by design

The most important thing to know: **retention is opt-in, and nothing is ever deleted by default.**

> The feature is gated by a master switch, `plugins.ml_commons.memory.retention_enabled`, which defaults to `false`. Until an administrator turns it on, the APIs reject any `retention_policy` or `pinned` input with a `403`, and the background job short-circuits without touching a single document. There are no hidden "recommended" defaults — every cluster-level default ships disabled (`-1`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The feature is gated by a feature flag, `plugins.ml_commons.memory.retention_enabled`, which defaults to `false`. Until an administrator turns it on, the APIs reject any `retention_policy` or `pinned` input with a `403`, and the background job short-circuits without touching a single document. There are no hidden "recommended" defaults — every cluster-level default ships disabled (`-1`).

```

> The feature is gated by a master switch, `plugins.ml_commons.memory.retention_enabled`, which defaults to `false`. Until an administrator turns it on, the container APIs reject any `retention_policy` or `pinned` input with a `403`, and the background job short-circuits without touching a single document. There are no hidden "recommended" defaults — every cluster-level default ships disabled (`-1`).

Reviewer: master switch -> feature flag

- **Bounded eviction.** Each count-based pass evicts at most 50,000 documents per type per run, converging over successive runs rather than issuing one massive delete.
- **Orphan-sweep grace period.** A background sweep also clears stray working-memory messages — those whose parent session no longer exists, and fully unattributable ones — once they've aged past a cutoff (a week by default), so recently orphaned data isn't touched. And the first time the sweep sees a container, it just stamps a baseline and deletes nothing, giving pre-existing data a full window to settle before any cleanup.
- **Staleness window.** Because the job runs on a schedule, expired memories may still appear in queries for up to one job interval (default 24 hours) before they're removed.

## Conclusion

Memory retention brings automatic lifecycle management to agentic AI in OpenSearch ML Commons. With a few declarative rules you can keep storage costs and context quality under control, while pinning ensures the memories that matter are never lost. And because the entire feature is opt-in and defaults to off, you adopt it entirely on your own terms.

> To get started, upgrade to OpenSearch 3.8, enable `plugins.ml_commons.memory.retention_enabled`, and attach a policy to your memory containers. One caveat: on multi-tenant clusters the retention job sits out for now, so your policies won't be enforced until multi-tenant support lands in a future release. To learn more about agentic memory in OpenSearch, see the [agentic memory documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agentic-memory/index/).

Reviewer 2: Should we refer to the agentic memory retention policy doc? I'm assuming this blog will be posted once the doc is released

Author: I've pointed this at the agentic memory landing page for now and will swap in the retention page URL once that doc is released.
